"ACID BLAST" ACIDBLAST

    Acid blast creates a powerful blast of acid that does a great deal of
    damage.

#
"ACTIVE SKILLS"
  Riding: This skill allows you to mount a beast and make it carry you
    and the supplies you have.  type help mount for more info.

  Bandage: An active skill in the art of medicine.  A player with this skill
    has the chance of reviving a fallen comrade in battle by applying knowledge
    learned through practice.  This skill is a must for those that do not
    have the god given powers of healing.

  Track: SEE TRACK

  Punch: Bare knuckle brawling is the best type of fun any can find!
    Punch aids those that can not seem to hang onto their weapon in
    battle, or those that do not wish to wield a weapon at all.
    The skill bare hand aids in this offensive skill greatly along
    with any str bonus that might be applied.  Those that wear
    gloves of some sort have been known to knock an opponent down
    to his knees, only to never see the light of day.

  Apraise : This skill give minor information on an object that is
    either a weapon, armour, or light source.  Message depicting
    the relative value of the object and information that is
    unique to each object.  Apraise on a weapon will give its
    weapon class, for the fighters that can specialize in that
    class.  For a torch, it will give the hours left to burn.
    On armour, it will show the Effective and True Armour class
    of the object.  If the True and Effective armour classes are
    not the same, it is time to get the armour repaired. This
    can also be done by just looking at the armour.

  DoorBash: A player with this skill has a chance to break down
    a door by the shear force aplied by hurling their body into it.
    This is a tiring skill and can even damage you if not careful.
    Ever bashed a door down and found that no floor was on the other
    side? (HINT)

#
ADVANCE
Immort-Only

To advance a player to a level higher than his present. Default is to
advance him one level. A level 0 player (Man/Woman) is always only
advanced by one level.

#
AID

  This prayer allows the target to have more hit points than what is normally
  allowed for their position.  It also has been known to help with ones
  hunger, thirst and even from time to time affect armour class and makes one
  hit better.

Duration: level.

#
ALLCOMMANDS

   This will give you a list of all the commands that are available
   to you at this moment.

#
"ANIMATE DEAD" ANIMATEDEAD

   Bringing forth a undead shell of the being which once lived is frowned
   upon by most in the realm.

#
APPEAR

   This command willfully dispells a invisibility spell.  Ironhands claim.

#
ARMOUR

   This incantation allows the caster to bring forth a invisible suit of
   magical protection that seems to allow protection even if the caster
   wears other forms of armour or protection.  It is known that a higher
   level mages magical armour will hold its consistancy much longer than
   one of lower level.
   The prayer for this spell seems to work much the same as several priests
   and mages have consulted and tested upon it.

Duration: Level of the Best Magic Class. See Note.
Damage: None
Special: AC is reduced by 2.  Note, this may not be shown by what is on your
	 score. Internally the AC is done by -100 <-> 100, not -10 <-> 10
	 so rounding does occur for the the score command. But it is a good
	 approximation as to your ac.
Note: Since this is a shared spell between mages and clerics, the duration
      is calculated as per the best level of the two. Not necessarily the
      class in which you practiced it first.

#
"ARMOUR CLASS" ARMOURCLASS AC

   Armour Class of a individual is dependant upon there ability to outmanuever
   their foe.  The armour that one wears upon his body also helps blunt the
   strike of a foes weapon.

#
ASSIST

  If you type assist <player> you will begin fighting the same
person the <player> is.

  ASSIST is similar to RESCUE except the <player> continues fighting.
It is better than KILL in many cases because you do not have to choose
between 1.golem and 2.golem (or 1.lamia that just entered the room).
Even though monsters of the same type assist each other in combat,
ASSIST is better because you will eliminate one aggressor much faster.

See also: RESCUE, KILL
#
"ASTRAL WALK" ASTRALWALK

   This prayer allows the caster to bring forth a door into a trans-dimensional
   realm from which one can go almost anywhere on the known world.  The
   prayer is rather draining and takes some time to cast although those
   who's faith is true to their diety have been noted to bring there followers
   along with them through their door, and out into the new location.  A
   high priest of Tyken had his last day as he prayed for the spell and
   transported himself and a small party to a location known only to him, he
   did not unfortunatly return.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: Only rooms that will allow you entrance as per magic can be
	 walked to.

#
ATTRIBUTES
Immort-Only

Currently these are the only attributes you may work with when working
with cust. Things in <> are what you are to enter, <CR> means hit return
at this point.

cust name		<name of room> <CR>
cust desc		<CR>
cust extra		<keywords> <CR>
cust exit		<dir> <door flags> <key> <to_room> <CR>
cust xdesc		<dir> <CR>
cust flags		<flags> <sector_type> <CR>
cust riv		<speed> <dir> <CR>
cust tele		<time> <to_room> <look-flag> <CR>

#
FLAMESTRIKE

  This prayer brings forth a pillar of flames from the heavens upon the
  casters command.  A very damaging spell as the flames of the pillar
  have crucified many with its scorching heat.  

Duration: None.
Damage: (level/5) * 1d8.

#
GAIN

  This command allows you to advance a level provided you have the right 
  amount of exp and that you are at a guildmaster that can train you.

#
PARALYZE

  This spell makes the chosen target become immovable for a short period of
  time.  This means that the target cannot do anything, including fight back
  if the caster happens to be beating on it.

Duration: 5 rounds.
Damage: 1 target immoble.

#
FEAR

  This incantation puts fear into the target of the spell.  This will result
  in the instant flight of that target instead of them remaining to fight.
  This incantation is crucial when traveling into heavily popluted areas
  with creates that will attack at a whim.

Duration: Special.
Damage: Forces mob to flee for a indefinate time.

#
SKILL SKILLS

    There is a new commands added called skills, it will show you
  your rating in the new skills for the game.

    There are new skills included in the game and there should more
  to come with time.  The tutor in various towns can teach you these
  skills and perhaps even commoners you may adventure to find.

  Skills have been broken up into two categories.

  1.  Passive
  2.  Active

  Passive skills are those that are always being used without you having
  to issue a specific command to make them act on you or another.  Various
  rolls are made against your knowledge of the skills to see if they aid
  you in what every action you are taking.  Never will a skill hinder you
  if you fail a roll, the most you can expect is that the normal affects
  will take place as if you never had the skill at all. 

  Active skills are those that you must invoke on your own.  These skills
  are activated by using the skill name and usually including an arguement
  for the skill to act on.

  See ACTIVE, PASSIVE for a skill list
#
PASSIVE

  Swimming : If proficient in swimming, the player having this passive skill
    will not have to spend as much movement while moving through shallow water.
    Water that normally can be walked through, not water that is too deep and
    requires a boat to traverse.  This skills is benefitial if you must leave
    your frigate off of shore due to the shallows.  Yes, frigates are being
    made for cross ocean journeys.

  Endurance: A player proficient with endurance has a good chance of
    maintaining his/her stamina in a fight.  This skill coincides with a 
    players constitution and what percent of their hits have been left. 
    All classes will benefit from this skill.

  Deciphering: This skill aids those that wish to read the arcane works of
    magic and have a better chance of understanding the spell that is written.
    All classes will benefit from this skill.  Because you are a castor does
    not mean you have the ability to read other spells besides the ones you
    know. Essentially this is the fabled 'READ MAGIC' but applies to all 
    classes that wish to use scrolls other then recall.

  Two_Hand: All characters may and most likely will wield weapons two-handed
    in this world.  A mage can apply this to a staff, a cleric to a hammer..
    you get the point.  Because you wield a weapon two-handed, you may not 
    use a shield nor hold something in your hand, punch will not work while
    doing this also.  This skill improves the chance that you will maintain 
    your grip on your weapon when a foe tries to disarm you, it will also aid
    you in damaging your enemy slightly more since you are now applying all
    of your upper body to the blow.  Characters and still be disarmed even
    with this skill though, no one is 100% proficient.

  Bare_Hand: All characters may attack with no weapon at all, doing minor damage
    plus any additional strength that might apply.  With this skill a player has
    essentially learned how to box and can now utilize this knowledge when faced
    with a battle without a weapon.  This skill also works along with the skill
    punch, aiding in accuracy and force for the blow.

  Spell_Craft: A spell caster with this skill has the chance to understand a
    spell even better once successfully cast.  When a player successfully casts
    a spell, a 2% bonus is added on up until 50% in the spell is achieved.
    The skill Spell Craft will add in an extra amount to this percent based
    on how well you know this art.

  Meditation: The act of meditating and being able to focus ones self aids in
    the recovery of both mana and health, a player with meditation can earn
    these two amounts back faster while resting or sleeping. A must for any
    that wishes to stay in style with the monks of the redspines.

#
MOUNT

  This command goes along with the RIDING skill you may learn.
  When you find a beast you wish to try and mount, type...

  mount <beast name>

  Depending on how well you know riding, and the disposition of the
  creature will determine if you are able to ride it or not.
  When mounted, you lose no movement points, except for those in
  combat, you have some spell capabilities, and some skills will
  not be usable when mounted, the same will apply towards some
  skills that are not usable to a person when mounted.
  You do not have control of the beast to the point of being able
  to issue orders to it, you may however simply type the direction
  you wish to travel and the mount shall carry you there.

  This is still experimental, all bug reports are welcome and encourged
  to help get this ironed out as fast as possible.  Comments and suggestions
  are also welcome.

  I am planning on make a stable, where you may take your mount (pet?)
  to be boarded, this way you can come back on the game and pick you
  mount (pet?) up with ot having to venture out to find another.


#
SPELL SPELLS

    Spells are the backbone of the magic user and the strict guidelines of
  many cleric religions.  Spells which a magic-using class can use are
  listed in the practices when one gains a level in their magic-using class.
  Clerics will find being extremely good will allow them to heal the
  appropriate amount while being evil will allow the cleric to harm targets
  quite well, yet they will suffer in their healing abilities.
  Please do not be dismayed about not seeing a entire spell list, simply
  ask those that are of higher levels if your curiousity gets the best of
  you.

    One can find out more about spells by 'help <spell>', if the reply comes
  back not in the help files please 'bug <spell name>'.

    Cyric and staff have taken great aims to make the spells in Wiley as
  close to the spells on would find in any players handbook for AD&D.  If
  you find that a spell is totally different than one you would find within,
  please 'bug <problem>'.

    More spells are being added constantly for all magic-using classes, 
  if you would like to see a unusual spell use the 'idea <spell>' to add
  it to our possibilities.

#
SPEC SPECIALIZATION

  Fighters may specialize in a weapon class of their chose, this is done
  by choosing the class you wish to become proficient with and spending
  the training in that class.  This is a passive skill that aids when
  in combat.  The normal +1 hit and +2 damage applies if a succesful
  skill roll is made while attacking.  The fighter may specialize
  in any one or more classes that are available at the time of
  training.  You may use the apraise command to look at different
  weapons to see if it may aid you in your type of specialization or
  not.

#
PEER

  A thief skill that allows them to look into an area that exists in
  one of the cardinal directions.  A thief will only be able to see
  into that room if the could actually walk into that room and look
  around, IE you can not look into a dark room nor can you look through
  a door.

See also: search
#
SEARCH

  This skill alows a player to search the local area for hidden or secret
  passages.  If a succesful skill check is made, the player is now aware
  of the exit and the true name of it.

#
"FIND TRAPS"

  This is a passive skill that acts when ever you encounter a trap in
  an area.  If a succesful roll is made against your skill, the trap
  is made quit apparent to you.

Disarm Traps is coming soon.
#
RULES

Player Killing:  The only way you may engage in combat with another player
  is to register yourself with Eli as a player that can and most likely
  will kill or be killed by other players.  This system should work for
  both hand to hand combat and spells, if this is not the case then please
  make a note to the board indicating what was done.

Disarm & Stealing: You will no longer be able to disarm another player
  unless both you and the victim have been registered to kill other
  players.

Charm: Charming another character or using a follower and forcing them
  to perform some act that will violate the stated rules or rules that
  have been posted or conveyed by a Immortal will result in the
  deletion of your character.

Multi-Character: Do to the limited resource this machine is currently
  running with, I ask that you only have one character on the game at
  once.  You may have another character to use as storage, but both
  character should not be on the game at the same time except when at
  one of the renting locations.  This clause is ONLY for exchanging items
  with a rental character.
  The first time you are found to have more then one character on the
  game you shall be warned to quit all extra characters.
  The second time the extra characters shall be forced off of the game
  and your eq left behind.
  The third time will result in deletion of you extra characters from
  the player file.
  The fourth time you are caught, all characters shall be deleted from
  the game.

#
MOBILES

    Mobiles, or monsters, in wiley have much the same stats as a player of
    there equal level.  Some mobs out there are simply going about their 
    business while others are out to gain items and exp like a average player.
    Mobiles have classes and class abilities just like you, so if you plan
    to bash a bandit, be ready to see one in return.  One of the advantages
    a player has over a mob is their ability to group randomly.  Mobs do this
    but only on rare ocasions.

See also : CONSIDER, GROUP

#
START

  When first starting out, you should make sure you stay within the city
of Shylar and keep supplied with food from the Baker and water from buck
at the inn.  You should find your the local master of your chosen class
and GAIN and PRACTICE there before adventuring.  Remember to equip yourself 
with the supplies you start out with. To do so just type wear all.  
Take a look at the map you may have been given and begin to explore the 
surrounding areas.  Remember to type SAVE very often.

See also: COMMANDS, PRACTICE, GAIN, SAVE, RACES, NEWS, SLANG

#
COMMANDS

  This is a short list of most useful commands, to obtain a full list type
the command 'allcommands' or help.

score	-	to see many statistics about your character
inv	-	to see your inventory.
eq	-	to see the objects you have equipped.
say	-	to talk to others in the same room.
tell	-	to say something to someone specific.
list	-	to get a list of items you can buy in a shop.
buy	-	to buy an item in a shop.
value	-	to get an idea of the money a shopkeeper will give you for
                   an item.
wear	-	to wear an object you have in your inventory
wield	-	to wield a weapon you have
rem	-	to remove an item from your equipped list.
offer	-	to get a price for a room at an inn.
rent	-	to save your stuff at an in.
save	-	duh?
shout	-	people in the same zone can hear what you shout.
prac	-	to practice skills from a person that will teach you.
who	-	to see who is on the game at the same time as you.
drop	-	to drop an item in your inv.
get	-	to pick an item up.
give	-	to give something to someone.
kill	-	to attack something.
cast	-	to cast a spell.

for a more indepth help page on each of these type HELP command such as...

help cast

See also : START
#
SWAT

>From : "SWitch ATtack"
For PC's only.
Usage: swat <mobile name>

   This command allows you to choose a new target while in combat.  The monster
   you are fighting at the moment will continue to fight you, but your attacks
   will be directed towards another target.

#
HOUSES KEEPS CASTLES

    When you obtain 25th level you become a Lord of the land and 
    receive a keep.  As you continue to advance, individuals will begin
    following you and will be at your command as hirelings.
    You will be required to complete a small quest designed by one
    of the Immorts in order to recieve this.

#
MONSUM

    Mages have been known to call upon the mists of summoning to bring
    forth temporary followers. Eventually the charm that was laid down
    upon them will lift and the creatures will remember nothing of
    your commands yet alone that you lead them.


#
CONTINUAL LIGHT

   Continual light creates a ball of light which can be held like a 
   torch or lantern to light up the room.

#
POLYMORPH

    This incantation allows you to form yourself into another creature of 
    the realm.  Mages generally refrain from extensive use of this spell as
    with time you grow to become more like the beasts you transform into.

* name         level
  goblin      	10
  orc         	10
  badger      	10
  beetle      	10
  troglodyte  	10
  cow         	10
  dog         	10
  frog        	10
  hobgoblin   	11
  spider      	11
  gnoll       	11
  ant         	11
  lemure      	12
  toad        	12
  stirge      	12
  fighter     	12
  bugbear     	13
  lizard     	13
  rat         	13
  ogre        	14
  tick        	14
  weazal      	15
  black dragon	16
  ape         	16
  blue dragon 	17
  gargoyle    	17
  ghast       	17
  lupan       	18
  owlbear     	18
  shadow      	18
  displacer   	19

#
METEOR SWARM

    Pulls forth a swarm of huge lava rocks that will smash into anything
    in the room doing massive destructive damage.

#
CACAODEMON

    This spell is wreathed in mystery. The only sure knowledge about it
    is that it is cast in the following manner:

	cast 'cacaodemon' one 
		.
		.
		.
	cast 'cacaodemon' six

#
CASTING

    To invoke the magickal forces  you must use a certain incantation.
    This is done in this manner:

    cast 'spell' target

#
"FAERIE FIRE FOG"

     The casting of this spell has been known to bring forth those that
     are unseen.  The pinkish glow has shown many a traveler his glory or
     death.

Duration: level/2.

#
MINOR CREATION

    Upon the casting of this spell, mist is drawn forth to bring a object
    into existance.  It is commonly known that one must clarify the object
    when casting the spell.

#
TRUE SIGHT

    The casting of this spell has been known to endow the castor with 
    unusual sight, seeing things they speak of in wonder only.

#
CONJURE

    The only thing known of this dangerous spell is that you must sacrifice
    something dear to you for it to call the daemon forth.

#
CALM

    This spell has been known to drown the fire in the worst ogres heart.

#
STONE SKIN

   The castors skin becomes like a statue.  Some believe casting this spell
   to often makes you a statue forever.

#
CHARM MONSTER

   Casting this spell upon a creature of the realm will, at times, make it
   see you as its master.  At other times it will strike you down.

#
REFRESH

   A travelers distance is often increased with this incantation.

#
SECOND WIND
  
   A travelers distance is often greatly increased with this incantation.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: This can give back leveld8+level move points

#
TURN

   The beings that dwell in the undead are often turned away if the castor
   speaks this spell at them.

#
SHIELD

   Tis rumored this spell is a major defense in mage battles.

#
SUCCOR

   This spell is writhed in mystery, none dare to ask their diety, none
   have the vanity to explore.

#
FIRESHIELD

   Let the fires of the neither realm burn about you.

#
ICE STORM

   This spell calls forth the winter winds, and the glaciers of ice.

#
CONE COLD

   One strong wind of this spell has been known to send the whirlwind upon
   another path.

#
RACES

    Monsters belong to races, as do you.  Some races do not get along
    or have natural enemies, so beware!
    
    Races that players can be include : 
        Human, Elven, Gnome, Dwarven, and Halfling

See also : HUMAN, ELF, GNOME, DWARF, HALFLING

#
DWARF DWARVES DWARVEN

	Dwarves are short, bearded folk known to mine deep into the
	earth for precious gems and metals.  Because of their short
        stature, they can not walk as fast as most taller races, but
	their strength and hardiness easily makes up for this.  Working
	in the dark underground regions has also gifted them with
	natural infravision.

#
ELF ELVES ELVEN
	
	The elves are a tall, graceful race, with a love of the arts
	and magick.  They are seen by many as arrogant and flightly,
	and have numerous racial hatreds.  Their long limbs and natural
	quickness allow them to easily outdistance most other races when
	on foot, especially in the forests.

#
HUMANS

	Humans make up the largest portion of the population of the
	'civilized' world.  They are considered the "stock" race, and
	act as a benchmark for many comparisons between the different
	races.

#
HALFLINGS

	Halflings are a short, jolly race, known to be extremely quick
	and good with their hands.  They are very 'laid back' and are both
	tolerant and tolerated but almost all other races.  Because of their
	frivolous attitude towards study and work, they tend to be weak in
	the magickal arts.

#
GNOMES
	
	Gnomes are the shortest race, and have alot of trouble keeping
	up with other races when walking.  These intellectual underground
	dwellers are quite adept at magick, and are gifted with infravision. 

#
PICK LOCKS

    Thieves only.

    For picking locks on doors and containers. Not all locks can be picked,
    and some locks and containers may be trapped, so beware!

    Example:
     > pick door
     > pick safe

See Also : OPEN, CLOSE, LOCK, UNLOCK
Thieves See Also : SNEAK, HIDE, BACKSTAB, STEAL

#
SNEAK

    Thieves and Rangers Only.

    Used for sneaking (moving in and out of rooms without anyone taking
    notice).  When you type sneak, there is no way to know if you actually
    sneak. If you successfully sneak, then you will continue to sneak for
    a little while. When you are sneaking, many monsters that would
    otherwise attack you will not notice you, allowing you to go places
    that no others can get to without encountering a battle on the way.

    Example:

    > sneak
    You'll try to move silently for a while. 

Thieves See Also : HIDE, BACKSTAB, STEAL, PICK

#
HIDE

    Thieves Only.
    When you type hide there is a chance that you hide in the room. If
    hidden you can only be sensed by the sense life spell. Even if
    sensed your identity will remain hidden. Hide is broken by pressing
    return, regardless of whether you typed a command or not.

    Example:

   > hide
   Ok.
   >  (you wait for ex. 5 mins and remain hidden for 5 mins)

   >  (You pressed enter and no longer hide)

Thieves See Also : SNEAK, BACKSTAB, STEAL, PICK
#
LOOK
    
    For studying your surroundings. 
    Examples:
    
    > look                                      
    > look AT the fido
    > look IN the bag
    > look to the south   (or just: 'look south' or 'l s')

    Note that if you LOOK AT CORPSE you will not see its inventory.
    To see what is inside a container (e.i. Corpse) use LOOK IN <OBJECT>.

See also : EXAMINE or READ

#
OPEN CLOSE LOCK UNLOCK

Usage (example):
 > open portal
or
 > open portal to the south
 > open portal south
 > op portal s
   (if there is more than one to choose from)

Thieves See Also : PICK

#
NORTH SOUTH EAST WEST UP DOWN

To walk/go in a given direction.

#
EAT DRINK SIP TASTE
If you are hungry or thirsty. 

Examples:

    > drink beer
    > eat bread

#
WHO

Lists the people currently in the game. Some people may choose to remain
unseen.

See also : WHOZONE, WHOD

#
WHOD

  By telneting to the port+1 the game is running on you are able to get a
list of active players on the game currently.  This will also show all gods
that are visible at the time.

i.e.  telnet wiley.cs.wmich.edu 2346    <- note 2345+1 = 2346

#
WILEYD

  Commands available are
   name	- show the names of the players
   title - show the titles of the players
   site - show the site from which players are coming from
   on - turn the daemon on
   off - turn the daemon off

#
GIVE

If you feel benevolent, you may give some stuff to someone in need. 

Example:

> give bread to the beggar
(can also be stated as:)
> give bread beggar

You may also use this format...

> give 3.bread bob			this will give the third bread to bob

> give 3*bread bob			this will give 3 breads to bob

> give all.bread bob			this will give ALL your bread to bob

For giving gold :

> give 100 coins bob

#
SAVE

Save your persona. This includes experience points, strength, gold, etc. 
It also saves your equipment, up to the first 200 items.

#
STRING

Immort-Only.

For changing the text-strings associated with objects and characters. The
format is:

string <type> <name> <field> [<string> | <keyword>]

Type is either 'obj' or 'char'.
Field is one of the following(the names may be abbreviated):
Name                  (the call-name of an obj/char - kill giant)
Short                 (for inventory lists (objs) and actions (chars))
Long                  (for when obj/character is seen in room)
Title                 (for players)
Description           (For look at. For objs, must be followed by a keyword)
Delete-description    (only for objs. Must be followed by keyword)

Where a string is expected as the last argument, a newline will make
you enter a string mode, and the game will prompt you for new lines to
the string until you exceed the maximum length for the string or you
end a line with a '@'.

#
LOAD

Immort-Only.

For loading new objects or characters from the database. The format is:
  load <type> <number>
Where <type> is either 'obj' or 'char', and number is the number of the object
or character you wish to create.
#
INVENTORY

If you are uncertain about what you are carrying, or simply want to check
that no thieves have pilfered from your backpack.

See also: EQUIPMENT

#
EQUIPMENT

When you want to know what armour, weapon, charms etc. you are wearing.

See also: INVENTORY

#
WEAR

If you want to wear some clothes, armour or the likes.
For example : 

> wear boots

to attempt to wear everything in your inventory, use :

> wear all

See also: REMOVE, EQUIPMENT

#
WIELD

When you get tired of bashing monsters with your fists, you might consider
wielding a weapon. 

Example : 

> wield sword
> wield two sword             - for wielding it two handed
   *NOTE some weapons require you to wield them two handed.

See also: REMOVE, EQUIPMENT
#
SCORE

Whenever you want to check whether you are still alive and healthy
or simply want to see how much money you have left.

#
SAY TELL WHISPER SHOUT ASK

If you consider communicating with other beings, you might be understood
better if you start your sentences with either say,tell,whisper or shout.

You can use ' as a shorthand for say with no space required before the
' as in:

'hello there.
#
QUI SHUTDOW

Just to prevent accidental quittings and/or shutdowns.
This command does not DO anything, it simply is.
#
KILL HIT

  This will start a round by round combat between you and the person
you name in the command.

#
KICK

Fighters only.

The success of a kick depends upon how well you are learned. The
higher level you reach the harder you kick. There is one small catch -
whenever you kick (or miss) you will be unable to type any command for
three rounds of 'Violence' - so be sure that you do not need to flee!

Fighters See Also : RESCUE, BASH, DISARM
#
BASH

Fighters only.

  The success of a bash depends upon how well you are learned. To bash
someone is to attempt to 'knock' that person over. If you succeed you
will inflict minor damage, and cause the victim to fall on its rear.
The victim will be unable to issue any commands for 2 rounds of
violence. If you miss you loose your balance and fall.
  A bash makes you unable to type commands for 2 rounds of violence.

Fighters See Also : RESCUE, KICK, DISARM
#
RESCUE

Fighters & Rangers Only.

  A rescue is an attempt to make a monster hit you instead of the
person being rescued. You can only 'turn' one monster for each
attempt. This is highly useful when playing in groups.

See Also : ASSIST, SWAT

Fighters See Also : BASH, KICK, DISARM
#
STEAL

Thief Only.

Use steal to steal gold or items from people. The chance of not
getting caught depends on how well you have practiced steal, and if
the person is asleep.

Example:

> steal gold drunk

Thieves See Also : BACKSTAB, PICK, SNEAK, HIDE
#
BACKSTAB

Thief only.

Is a way to sneak up on a person, and attempt to place you dagger in
his back, at exactly the point where it does most damage. A successful
backstab gives a damage multiplier, depending on level.

The chance of successfully backstabbing a person depends on how well
you have practiced backstab at your guild.

Thieves See Also : STEAL, PICK, SNEAK, HIDE
#
CAST
For magical people. If you want to throw a spell at someone or something.

  i.e.
    cast 'spell' target  
    The "spell" must be enclosed in ('), one on each side.

#
DISARM

   Ranger and Fighter Only.

   This skill allows the fighter or ranger to make his opponent lose
   grasp of his or her weapon and send it flying to the ground.  A disarmed
   opponent is much easier to beat than one still wielding his or her 
   weapon.

Rangers and Fighters See Also : RESCUE
Fighters See Also : KICK, BASH

#
DROP
If you lose interest in a carried item, you can drop it on the ground.

Example :

>  Drop bottle

  If you feel like getting rid of all your earthly possessions, you
may use drop all.  Also you can drop 9*bottle, which would drop 9
bottles, but leave the rest in your hands.

See also: GET
#
PURGE

Immort-Only.

A way to make the world a little cleaner.
Usage:
  purge                         To empty a room of monsters and objects.
  purge <object>                Figure this one out yourself.

#
STAT

Immort-Only.

  If you are interested in a person and want to find out about
his/her/its skills, strength, mana, hitpoints etc. In addition, 'stat
room' will give you useful information about the room you are in.

#
ORDER

  If you have a follower, you may order them to do things, as if they 
were doing the action themselves...

such as

> order followers shout Hiya Cyric ;)

#
BUY SELL VALUE
Commands for the shops - very useful too !

You may use buy to purchase items at shops...

buy bread			will buy one bread
buy 3*bread			will buy (3) three breads.

sell dagger			will sell the dagger to the shop keeper

you may only buy the number of items you may carry....

Value will give you an estimate of how much the shop keeper will give you for
an item. use it before you sell the item.

#
WEATHER
If you are uncertain whether the sun is shining or the rain is pouring down.
#
READ
When you want to read something.
#
REMOVE
If you tire of wearing some armour or wielding a weapon.

rem shield
rem sword
rem all			removes all things being used now.
rem 2.cloak		removes the second cloak worn

#
SHOPS
  Shops are places where the adventurer may purchase equipment for his
quests, and where he may sell his treasure if he should manage to
survive the perils with his life and sanity intact. Many shops trade
only in a specific type of merchandise. Thus, a baker may well refuse
to buy your armour, even if it is of high quality!

See also: BUY, SELL, LIST, VALUE
#
SOCIAL ACTIONS
Commands mainly for social interaction:

applaud, beg, bleed, blush, bounce, bow, burp, cackle, chuckle, clap,
comfort, cough, cringe, cry, cuddle, curtsey, dance, daydream, fart,
flip, fondle, french, frown, fume, gasp, giggle, glare, grin, groan,
grope, grovel, growl, hiccup, hold, hop, hug, yawn, kiss, laugh, lick,
love, moan, nibble, nod, nudge, pat, peer, point, poke, ponder, pout,
puke, punch, purr, ruffle, scream, shake, shiver, shrug, sigh, sing,
slap, smirk, smile, snap, snarl, sneeze, snicker, sniff, snore,
snuggle, spank, spit, squeeze, stare, steam, strut, sulk, tackle,
taunt, thank, twiddle, wave, whine, whistle, wiggle, wink, worship

#
WIZ
A listing of the commands for immortals (should be unavailable for mortals  :)
#
WARRIOR FIGHTER

     Warriors are the strong fighters of the realm.  Generally they take 
   jobs in the mercenary fields or perhaps guards of a city or town.  
   They live and die by the blade that they have chosen their own, although
   seem to take a few with them when they go.
     Warriors are the ultimate fighting machines and there skills justify it
   as so.  They are allowed to practice several effective combat tactics
   including kick, bash, rescue, and disarm.  Warriors of higher levels 
   also see the benefit of multiple attacks.


See also: PRACTICE
#
THIEF
  Thieves are known to have very special qualities, that no other
class offers.  Many of these qualities can come in handy in many
situations, such as picking locks.  They are not very combat oriented,
however, so do not expect to be able to kill many things by yourself.
The useful aspect of thieves involves their ability to scout ahead,
avoiding monsters, detecting and removing traps and selling and buying
items at the black market.
   You can improve you skills by using the practice command.

See also: PRACTICE
#
CLERIC
  This class gives you the wisdom of peace, blessing and healing,
though it is possible to learn more violent spells.  You can improve
your spells by using the practice command.

See also: PRACTICE
#
MAGIC USER WIZARD MAGE
  This is the class of powerful and violent magic, but the magic user
does not control the nature, and can therefore not bless and such. You
can improve your spells by using the practice command.

See also: PRACTICE
#
RANGER
     
     This class gives you both the strength of the fighter, but the wisdom
   and peace of a priest.  It is rumored that the gods of the woods look
   favorably on those that keep a GOOD outlook on life, those that do not
   seem to find themselves becoming more as a fighter.
     Rangers are not allowed to wear any solid plates of metal upon their
   bodies, although studded and perhaps banded armours would be allowed.
     These men of the land benefit from several different skills and at 
   higher levels gain the use of a limited spell field.


See also: Practice
#
PRACTICE PRACTISE
  Practice is the way you improve your spells and skills. You must go
to your guildmaster to let him/her help you improve.  If you type
practice, you will see which skills you can improve upon, and how good
you already are at these.  You can then use practice <skill>, to
practice the appropriate skill.  You can only practise a certain
amount for each level you gain, and you do not have to save this, it
can be accumulated.  When you go out and begin to use this new skill
you will begin to understand what it is you have just learned. In essence
you will improve you ability to do use this skill.  This will allow
you to become an average user of the skill.  To improve further you must
go back and have someone (guildmaster) teach you the subtlties of the
skill you are using.

The number of practices you recieve is based on the class you are and
the prime ability for that class.  A fighter is strength for example.
This is not the only factor in gaining practices, it is also based on
the NEW things you have done to gain exp.

#
EXITS
  Gives you a list of the obvious exits from your location. Of course,
the less obvious ones will not show up here - you have to THINK in
order to locate those.

#
LEAVE
  If you feel claustrophobic, typing 'leave' will make you use the
nearest obvious exit to the outside.

#
ENTER
  If you type 'enter' while you are outdoors, you will enter any
nearby shelter.  You can also follow 'enter' with an argument; for
example, 'enter window'.

#
TIME
  Gives you the current 'gametime'. Your initial reaction to the
output of this command may be one of surprise, but you will get used
to it. you will have to, at any rate, since certain things in the game
depend on this particular notion of time; the opening hours of the
shops, for example.

#
BUG TYPO IDEA
For making useful suggestions to the maintainers of the game. Examples:

bug the entire game crashes when I type 'put bag in bag'
idea make a restaurant in Midgaard
typo 'sence' should be spelled 'sense'
#
QUIT
  When you get tired of playing, you can leave the game by typing
'quit'. Note that whatever stuff you might be carrying with you is
simply left on the ground. If you wish to have your equipment put away
until you are able to come back, you will have to find an inn.

See also: INN
#
INN INNS
  Inns are places where the weary traveler may rest while the
innkeeper looks after his equipment and treasure. Specifically, you
may use inns to store your gathered equipment while you are not
playing the game (we all have to sleep sometimes, there is no shame in
that).

See also: OFFER, RENT
#
OFFER RENT
  For use in the receptions of inns. The command 'offer' will make the
innkeeper tell you the cost of storing your carried items for one day.
'rent' will store the items and make you leave the game. The next time
you enter, you will start out in the reception where you left. The inn
will store your items as long as you have the gold to pay the rent.

See also: INN
#
GET TAKE
  If you find something interesting on the ground, you may use 'get'
to pick it up. Example: get greatsword. If you are in a hurry, or if
you just feel very greedy, you may type get all. You can also use
'get' to extract objects from containers. Example: get dagger from
bag.  Other examples:

  get all.bread from bag		gets all of the breads from the bag
  get 9*bread from bag			gets 9 breads from bag
  get all from corpse

See also: DROP PUT
#
PUT
For putting stuff in containers. Example: Put the dagger in the bag.

  put bread bag			puts a bread in the bag
  put all.bread in bag		puts all the bread in the bag
  put 9.bread in bag.		puts the ninth bread in the bag
  put 9*bread in bag		puts nine breads into your bag.

See also: GET
#
EXAMINE
May give you some valuable information about an item, or a monster.

See also: LOOK
#
WRITE

  In order to write a note, you need a piece of blank paper (or
similar), and a pen of some sort. You can then type something like
write on the paper with the pen, whereupon you will be asked to type
in your note at the keyboard.

#
NEWS

  This command will show you the current edition of the DikuMUD
Herald, a publication dedicated to news and useful information about
this world. It is a VERY good idea to check it out once in a while or
more often to see recent updates and bullitens.

#
SLEEPING WAKE REST SIT STAND
  For changing your position. If you feel weary, It is probably a good
idea to sit and rest for awhile; or maybe even take a nap.

#
POUR
If you want to pour some liquid from one container to another.
#
GRAB
For getting a good grip on something; a torch, for example.

See also: WEAR, WIELD, REMOVE
#
FOLLOW
  If you happen to be going in the same direction as someone else, why
not simply follow that person? For example: Follow joe. If you are
following someone and you wish to stop doing that, then all you have
to do is follow yourself: follow <your name>.

See also: GTELL, GROUP
#
FLEE
  If you are in a fight and things are beginning to get a little
uncomfortable (maybe you are about to die), just type 'flee', and
presto! you are out of harm's way - that is, IF you are still standing
and, IF there is a suitable exit nearby, and IF that exit does not
simply take you out of the frying pan and into the fire... but then,
who wants to live forever?

#
INFO
Gives you some useful hints and information about the game.
#
WHERE
Tells you the location of a monster, or an object. Examples:

where torch
where dragon

#
USERS
Tells you who is logged on to the game, and where they are playing from.
#
LEVELS
Lists the levels of your class. 
#
BRIEF
  Toggle brief mode. When in brief mode, you do not see the
descriptions of the room you are in; only the name of the room, and
the people and objects in there. Unless you are very familiar with the
area in which you travel, however, it is not advisable to use this
command. Frequently, you will find small, but vital hints in the
descriptions of the rooms: An extra peek at your surroundings could
mean the difference between life and death!

See also: COMPACT
#
!
Repeat the last command typed at the keyboard.
#
CONSIDER

Usage : consider <monster>

  This command will compare your Level with the <monsters> level. You
will then receive a rough estimate, which is by no means exact.

Example:
  > consider fido

#
EXPERIENCE XP

Whenever you kill a monster you earn experience points.
When enough experience points are earned, you raise a level after
going to a teacher and typing 'gain'.

A player will earn exp based on the number of classes they have.
ie.  amount = amount/number of classes.  This is true for both multi
and single class characters.  A single class will go up in level faster
as it may seem on the outside, but a multi will actual have the same amount
of exp spread between the number of classes.

When dieing, a player loses exp in accordance to the following chart:

Level			Amount
1-7			1/( 6 * number of classes)
7-14			1/( 5 * number of classes)
15-21			1/( 4 * number of classes)
22-28			1/( 3 * number of classes)
29-49			1/( 2 * number of classes)

As you can see, low levelers lose less exp then a more experienced adventurer.
The key word is experienced, a player that has been around long enough to
obtain a level 29 or above has built sufficient resources to protect themself
and provide a means to avoid death.Low level players do not have this advantage
on their side, this is the reason for the smaller reduction in exp loss when
dieing.

It may seem that multi class characters are losing less exp then a single
class character, but remember, the multi class character has already split
the exp amount between the classes.  Since the amount initial given was
split, and the formulae is above ( amount  = amount / #classes) the amount
lost should also be used in the same fashion to make it fair between multi
and single class characters.  This algorythim has both types of players
basically earning exp and losing exp at the same rate even though the numbers
may not actual be the same when compared.

See Also: GROUP
#
GROUP
Usage : GROUP [player]

If you are a group member, then you will share experience points for
killing monsters equally among the group. Experience points will only
be shared among group members that are in the same location, at the
time of the killing blow. Sharing is regardless of whether the group
members have been participating in the fight.

Group with no argument show a list of people with whom you are grouped.

To make a group, a leader must be selected. All members of the group
must then follow the leader using the follow command. The leader
should NOT follow anyone at all! The leader can now toggle group
membership for each player in the group, by using group
<player_name>. The leader should remember to include himself in the
group.

Example:

Cyric and Muth wish to group with Grimwell.

Cyric: follow grimwell
Muth: follow grimwell 
(grimwell should be following no one but himself)
grimwell: group grimwell
grimwell: group cyric
grimwell: group muth

Later when grimwell gets upset at muth (because he is sleeping all the
time) he types : 

> group muth

to kick Muth out of the group.

See Also: XP EXPERIENCE
#
QUAFF POTIONS

Use : quaff <Potion>

Quaff is used to drink a potion.

#
RECITE SCROLL SCROLLS

Use : recite <Scroll> [Target]

Recite is used to read a magical scroll. The "target" can be an object, 
character, or nothing (which generally defaults to yourself).

#
USE WAND STAFF STAFFS WANDS

Use : Use <Staff>
      Use <Wand> <Target>

Using staves will automatically target everybody (or everything) in a
room, in some cases, or everyone not in your group in others.
Therefore staves are naturally very powerful, and yet may be very
dangerous to use around other players.

Using wands require that you point it at a target, which can be either
a character or an object.

Both staves and wands must be HELD in the hand prior to use! (Use the
grab or hold commands). You must still supply the name of the staff or
wand to avoid confusion.

#
TELEPORT

   This spell will take the target to a place about the realm.  Unlucky
   recipients have been ported into a solid rock before, never seen again.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: A victim of this spell gets a save

#
BLESS

   This prayer is one that a alcolyte learns early in his duties to his
   diety.  Upon the completion of this spell those that travel with the
   caster, and the caster, recieve a blessing from their diety allowing 
   them to combat with increased efficiency.

Duration: Level/3
Damage: None
Special: + 1 hit, + 1 save

#
BLINDNESS

   This short incantation causes the sight of another to be taken from 
   them.  It is commonly known amung the houses that Quintelan has been
   experimenting with this spell trying to increase and decrease, upon 
   casting, the time of which the spell is effective.
   The prayer of this spell is commonly known to those priests that follow
   a darker path, but to those that see only the light and truth the true
   words to the spell often avoid them.

Duration: 2d4 hrs
Damage: None
Special: Victim is -4 hit and armour is increased by 2.

#
CLONE

   Calls the mist to replicate something.  The spell is frowned upon by
   most mages.

#
"CONTROL WEATHER"

   Allows the castor to worsen or better the weather.

#
"CREATE FOOD"

  The castor of this spell creates a small mushroom from which a full
  meal can be had.  Depending on the level of the castor, the mushroom
  will sometimes become over ripe and there by harm the person eating
  it.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: None

#
"WATER BREATH"

   Castors have been known to breath like the gilled creatures.

#
CREATE LIGHT

   Creates a light for one to see by.

#
FLY

   Allows one to fly about, or levitate as most uses would allow.

#
"CREATE WATER"

   Brings water forth into a container. The container must be clean and
   one that has already contained the purest water that will refill it.
   Strange side affects have been known to happen to those that do not
   prepare their receptical beforehand.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: A container can be filled to the top with this spell.

#
"CURE BLIND"

   Returns the sight of one who has lost it.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: The victim has their sight restored to them, if affected by a magical
	 means of blindness

#
"CURE CRITIC"

   This prayer is the third and most powerful of the simple curing spells.
   Its words are hard to come by, even for those that follow a virtous
   path yet they often recieve the full benefits if they are pure.  Others,
   who do not see the light, have a hard time casting this spell, as the
   intricate prayers are hard to come by making the full extent of this
   spell evaid their grasp.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: A cleric can give upto 3d8+3 points back in health.
Note: It has been said that those that follow the ways of good and
      virtue have been able to restore more then this meager amount
      and sometimes regenerating a body to full.

#
"CURE SERIOUS"

   This prayer, more intricate than cure light follows the others path
   in, it would seem, the same way.  Those that are true of heart seem
   to be able to cure the worst wound, while others find that the prayer
   comes with difficulty and can not recieve the full extent.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: A cleric can give upto 2d8+2 points back in health.

#
"CURE LIGHT"

   The prayer of this spell is often the first that any alcolyte learns,
   as this is the backbone of many dietys paths.  Those that are true
   of heart and follow nothing other than truth and virtue find the prayer
   almost flow with a music from their lips, healing the worst of wounds.
   The prayer, so simple in its words, at times comes hard to those that
   follow a darker path, they recieve the benefits of the spell, yet lack
   the true knowledge to heal a bad wound.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: A cleric can give back 1d8 points back in health.  It is has been
	 said that those clerics true to their faith have been able to
	 heal more then this meager amount.

#
"CAUSE CRITIC"

   The words of this prayer flow within the priests that are truely dark
   in the heart causing immense pain in those that are the targets of the
   prayer.  Those that follow the path of light often find this intricate
   prayer hard to pronounce, finding the target not suffering the full
   damage of this spell.  It is known a high priest of Aklan has cast this
   prayer upon a follower stealing his life from him on the stop not even
   giving it a second thought.

Duration: None
Damage: 3d8 + 3
Special: None

#
"CAUSE SERIOUS"

   This prayer is the second to be learned by those that follower the
   path of darker realms, for this is often their best attack as those
   that follow the truely vile way find there amount of pain increased as
   the words of the prayer almost flow with a malevolent, stinging song.
   Those of a light path find the words of this spell difficult to say,
   the pain that the spell causes not as much as one would think.

Duration: None
Damage: 2d8 + 2
Special: None

#
"CAUSE LIGHT"

   This spell is the first spell learned by those clerics that chose to
   follow a darker path, for it is with this spell that man Aklan followers
   must cause pain onto others.  Followers have been commonly seen casting
   this spell on someone walking the bazaar, for no reason other than seeing
   the pain in anothers eye.
   Those of a light path find this spell difficult to cast, the words of
   the prayer evading the caster, the spell doing much less damage.

Duration: None
Damage: 1d8
Special: None

#
CURSE

   Brings forth the wrath of ones diety upon a foe.  Used only by priests
   of a disdained diety. It has been shown in the past that clerics of
   true power can alter the strengths of metal with this spell.

Duration: 24 hrs
Damage: None
Special: -1 Hit and -1 save.

#
"DETECT EVIL"

   The incantation of this spell allows one to see a coloured outline of
   the targets true faith.  Those who find themselves following a lighter
   path through life find the spell lasting longer, allowing them to see
   more of there eternal foes.  Several high mages have been experimenting
   with this spell trying to get many different colours beyond those which
   the spells calls upon.
   The prayer is very similar to the incantation although the faith of the
   caster is much more dependant upon how long the spell allows you to see
   those of evil.

Duration: 20 hrs
Damage: None
Special: Those of a good alignment have been able to sustain this spell
	 for days on end...

#
"DETECT INVISIBILITY"

   This incantation allows the caster to look into a alternate realm, one
   that lives in a negative vision.  Those that recieve the incantation of
   this spell are allowed to look into the world and see those who dwell
   within, those that walk upon the vision world within the invisibilty
   that the other offers.

Duration: 5 hrs + 1hr/level
Damage: None
Special: Those things equal or less in level are seen by you with the aid of
	 this spell.

#
"DETECT MAGIC"

   This incantation allows the caster to look over the items in his presence
   and see the magic that might dwell within them.  Many high mages have
   tried with extent to find the exact dweomer, but as of yet no progress
   has been commented.

Duration: 2hrs + 1hr/level
Damage: None
Special: None

#
"DETECT POISON"

   This prayer allows the caster to look within the target and see what
   flows within their veins.  If a poison is present it will show itself
   to the caster allowing him to locate it for removal.

Duration: Instant
Damage: None
Special: Can be used on an object or player

#
"ENCHANT WEAPON"

   This incantation is very drawing upon the caster, often forcing him to
   sleep for days, possibly weeks, trying to recover from the loss of 
   power.  For, this spell takes the power from the mage and places it 
   within the item casted upon.  It has been noted, by those that dabble in
   this spell, that higher powered mages seem to be able to place more into
   a item than those of lower levels.

Duration: Permanent
Damage: None
Special: A weapon already altered by a magical means may not be affected by
	 this spell.  The power intoned into the weapon will vary as the
	 castor rises in level, but shall never be worsened.

#
HEAL

   This prayer calls upon the diety to heal all wounds that would ail the
   target of the spell.  This spell is recieved by all that have gained
   the power to cast yet those that are true to virtue find the very 
   difficult prayers of this spell to flow from their lips healing all that
   may ail someone.  Others, especially those that follow a dimmer path
   find the spell heals, yet the true power is just out of their reach.
   The dark of heart can heal yet the true meaning of the spell evades 
   them.  It is known that a high priest of Tyken has healed even the laim
   to full health, allowing them to lead a fullfilled life, having been
   touched by a diety.

Duration: None
Damage: Special
Special: Those with the evil out look on life will do less healing
	 then those seeking a life of virtue and goodness.  The same
	 is mirrored with that of Harm.  A truely holy cleric could
	 take a fighter up to full while others may only heal twice
	 of what their level is.

#
INVISIBILITY

   This incantation allows the target the spell to step into a paralel realm
   that has been reported to be much different than our own.  Although this
   realm has only been seen by one, whom the spell seems to have misfired
   slightly, is claimed to exit, none but the one can varify.  On the
   usual this spell allows the target to slip into a form of non-reality in
   which very few things can see.  You in fact become unseeable to normal
   eyes allowing one to more freely within many hostile realms.  It is
   commonly noted that attacking another while in this state will immediately
   cause one to become visible again.

Duration: 1hr + (level/2)
Damage: None
Special: This is nullified if combat is entered, and a person is rendered
	 visible to those that can see into other plains of existance.

#
"LOCATE OBJECT"

   This prayer helps the caster find a object that he knows the exact name
   of.  It must be something close to the caster or well known to him at
   the least, for finding this object somewhere across the realm is a 
   ardous and long task.  Some have noted that this spell cast only once
   has taken days in the process.

Duration: None
Damage: None
Special: None

#
POISON

   A painful spell to those it is cast upon.  This spell is used only by
   priests who worship a disdained diety.

Duration: 6 hrs
Damage: Special
Special: The amount of damage done per hour is based on the victims
	 constitution and the level of the castor.  It has been reported
	 that a high level castor has been able to vanquish foes with
	 a single casting of this. Be warned, creatures that natuarly
	 produce venoms can sometimes reflect the effects of this spell.

#
"PROTECTION FROM EVIL"

   Allows the target to accept some protection from the evils about.
   The undead of the land flee from clerics protected by this ward, 
   if they were created by a low level cleric of an evil church. It
   is known that some undead are not affected at all by this
   spell, but instead look for those hiding behind its affects.

Duration: 1hr + level/2
Damage: None
Special: 


#
"REMOVE CURSE"

   Has a chance to remove anothers disdained curse.

#
"REMOVE POISON"

   Has a chance to remove the infected body of its poison.

#
"REMOVE PARALYSIS"

   Makes a attempt to restore life to a paralyzed body.

#
SANCTUARY

   Offers some protection to the elements about you.

#
WEAKNESS

   Drains some of the life giving strength.

#
KNOCK

   Tis known no door shall stand in the way of a knowledged mage.

#
"KNOW ALIGNMENT"

   Helps one see the true face of another.

#
SLEEP

   Helps another find peace in sleep.

#
"DISPEL MAGIC"

   Attempts to take the magic dweomer from something else.

#
STRENGTH

   Endows another with some strength.

#
VENTRILOQUATE

   Casted upon another followed by that which he should say has ruined many
   a spokesman that didn't bend to the ways to the house in power.

#
"WORD OF RECALL"

   Brings the recipient closer to understanding of his diety.

#
SUMMON

   Tis rumored this will bring something to the castor.  Most refrain as
   it has been outlawed as a general rule.

#
"CHARM PERSON"

   Allows another to see the things as the castor does.

#
"SENSE LIFE"

   Many have been able to find that which is unseen.

#
"MAGIC MISSILE"

   This incantation is the backbone of many adventuring mages.  Upon gaining
   higher power in this sphere one gains the power to throw more missiles
   upon the target.

Duration: None
Damage: 1d4+1 per missile
Special: 1 missile per 2 levels, max of 5 missiles

#
"CHILL TOUCH"

   This incantation trys to drain a targets strength and sears
   them with an icy cold touch.  A novice from the house in Highstaff once
   defeated the local champion by touching him repeatedly with the 
   incantation causing him to become weak beyond aggresion.  

Duration: 12 hrs
Damage: 1d4 per 3 levels
Special: -1 Strength with successful attack

#
"BURNING HANDS"

   Calling forth this incantation brings forth some flame of the plane of
   elemental fire.  This, shot from ones fingertips, blows into everything
   that stands in front of the caster.  A modification by Quintelan, a high
   elven mage allowed his traveling companions to avoid the flames.

Area Affect Spell.
Duration: None
Damage: 1d6 + level 
Special: All things in the room except the caster will be affected.

#
"SHOCKING GRASP"

   Touching a target after incanting this spell sends a powerful jolt of
   energy into them causing great pain and dispair.  This spell has been
   famed the next step to a novice traveling mage, next up from magic missile
   that is.

Duration: None
Damage: 1d8 + level

#
"LIGHTNING BOLT"

   Upon the incantation of this spell, a higher level mage draws forth some
   of the lightning from the eternal storm.  This energy is then discharged
   into the chosen target.  It has been noted by a high level mage in the
   Highstaff house that one recieves much greater control and more bolts to
   fire as they advance in this sphere.  He crushed a mountain giant with
   one incantation of this spell, only to be traced and hunted down by the
   clan orcs.

Duration: None
Damage: 5d6 + ( One extra bolt for each 5 levels starting at 10th level )

i.e.  50th level mage strikes with 14 bolts of lightning.

#
"COLOUR SPRAY"

   This incantation calls forth the rays of the rainbow often blinding all
   those in its path.  The rays also seem to sear into the target causing 
   them great pain and agony. A modification by a high elven house mage,
   Quintelan, tried to exempt ones traveling companions from the destruction
   of the dangerous rays.  He failed, yet is still trying much to the dismay
   of those that follow him.

Area Affect Spell.
Duration: Special
Damage: 1d6 per creature, affects everyone except castor.
Special: Everyone except castor is affected by colour spray.
	 Those failing their save are blinded for 2d4 hrs.
         See BLINDNESS

#
"ENERGY DRAIN"

   This incantation is the most draining a mage can cast.  With this spell
   one must put forth part of his life energy to draw forth part of the
   targets life energy, then with the succesful completetion of the spell
   both forces are drawn back to the caster, gaining the benefits of both.
   A Quintelan renegade mage had quite a lot of luck draining the life of
   another and himself being advanced quickly until his luck ran out, tis
   rumored the spell turned on him and he was consumed in his own greed for
   power.

Duration: None
Damage: Very Very Evil, only those with the blackest of hearts will find
	out its secrets through use....

#
FIREBALL

   The draining and long incantation of this spell brings forth a small, but
   gaining sphere of elemental fire.  Upon contact with the disignated 
   taget the sphere explodes contacting with everything in the mages 
   immediate area, only the caster is naturally immune to the destructive
   effects of this dangerous spell.  Many mages in the Quintelan house have
   been trying to negate those that travel with them but have only ended up
   with charred corpses.

Area Affect Spell.
Duration: None
Damage: ( Level/5)d6 + 2d6 worth of damage.
Special: Objects carried by creatures will also suffer damage.

i.e. 50th level mage does 12d6 worth of damage to area of affect.

#
EARTHQUAKE

   The cleric that calls upon their diety for this incantation brings forth
   the elements of the earth to tremor and distroy the land and people about
   him.  Upon the completion of this prayer all that stand about the caster
   will be knocked to their knees and possibly be crushed under the falling
   debri.  Many priests have prayed to have their companions spared from 
   this harsh damage yet none has reported any recognition.

Area Affect Spell.
Duration: None
Damage: 1d8 + level
Special: Those that fail save, fall and must wait 3 rnds to stand and fight.
	 Affects all in room except castor.

#
"DISPEL EVIL"

   Trys to shun those who are of disdain.

#
"DISPEL GOOD"

   Trys to shun those who are of virtue.

#
"CALL LIGHTNING"

   The cleric that prays for this spell must have the storm at their command,
   without it there is no lightning from which to call the prayer.  After
   the long prayer has been cited the storm releases its power upon the
   unfortunate target allowing it to feel the full power of the storm, and
   the truth of faith.  It has been noted that the priests that adhere to
   complete compliance with the alignment of their diety bring forth bolts
   of extreme power often downing a small army of goblins.

Duration: None
Damage: Special
Special: Normal damage is 2d6, can not be saved against
	 1d6 + ( Level/5 )d6 can be saved for half damage.

i.e. 50th level cleric does 13d6 points of damage.

#
HARM

   This prayer is one known best by priests who's faith has taken a darker
   path, for they draw the life from their victims and then smite them with
   a single blow.  Those of a more pure path seem to have the words of the
   prayer weak in their tongues, the spell barely affecting the target at
   which they strike.  It has been commonly noted that followers of Aklan,
   especially the high priests have struck even there own followers down,
   truely showing their faith, there hearts cold and black.

Duration: None
Damage: Special
Special: Those with the evil out look on life will do more damage then
	 those seeking a life of virtue and goodness.  The same is mirrored
	 with that of Heal.  A truely vile Aklan follower could take a
	 fighter down to his last 4 hit points while others only do
	 their level worth of damage.

A victim of this spell is allowed a save for no damage done.

#
HELP

Following help is available:

HELP help       - This text.
HELP            - List the available commands.

Help searches for a partial match of the entered word, including any
spaces that may follow the word.

Example:
 > 'help magic mis'
    will find the help text for the magic missile spell.

 > 'help mag '
   will not match anything.

 > 'help mag'
   will match 'magic user' or 'magic missile' depending on first
   occurrence in the help file.
#
WIZHELP
Immort-Only

List the privileged commands available to you. Can only be used by immortals.
#
NOSHOUT
Immort-Only

  Prevents you from (or allows you to) hearing shouts, if used with no
arguments.  Can be used with the name of a player, to prevent him/her
from hearing shouts, as well as from shouting. Can only be used by
certain more powerful beings.

#
RESTORE
Immort-Only

  If used on a mortal, this command will reset that players mana and
hit points.  If used on an Immortal various values will be reset to
their proper values.

#
COMPACT
  If you have a small display you might want to use this command. It
turns off (or on) the extra newline after output to your screen.

See also: BRIEF
#
HERMIT
  Type deafen and all shouts are no longer heard.  Type deafen once again
and shouts can once again be heard.

See also : SHOUT
#
WIMP

  Wimp mode will make you flee once you have dropped below 5 hitspoints.  This
is not guarenteed but it is better then nothing at all.

At 3rd level you will no longer be able to use wimp.

#
INFRA INFRAVISION
   Infravision is a spell that allows you to see heat sources in
otherwise dark conditions.  It does not allow you to read scrolls, or
find items.  In addition, usage of spells which create large amounts
of heat may cause temporary blindness in Infravision-affected players
and monsters.

Certain races are naturally gifted with Infravision.

#
CUST
Immort-Only

   Cust will allow you to customize certain aspects of a room that you
are currently 'standing' in. Below is a list of available fields that
you may use when customizing.

cust <field> <attribute>

field:
    name : This is the name of the room you are in.
    desc : This is the rooms main description.
    extra: This is the rooms extra description.
    exit : This works with one of the FIVE exits available.
           You may add an exit, delete an exit or change
           certain properties of an exit.
    xdesc: This works on a exits description.
    flags: This works on the room flags. 'help room_flags'

See also: ATTRIBUTES

#
ROOM_FLAGS

   Room_flags			Sector_flags
   -----------------            -----------------
   Dark         1		Indoors		0
   No mob       4		City		1
   Indoors      8		Field		2
   Peaceful     16 		Forest		3
   No steal     32		Hills		4
   No sum       64		Mountains	5
   No magic     128 		Water		6
   Private      512		No-swim Water	7
				Air		8
                                Underwater	9


#
ECHO

  This will work as a switch.  The text you type will either be echoed back
to you or not, depending on the state you leave the switch.

See also: BRIEF, COMPACT, PAGER

#
PAGER

This command will toggle the in-game text pager on and off.  Certain clients
have built in pagers so you may wish to use this command.  If you have your
pager on, text that would exceed the length of the screen will be paused 
until you hit return (or q, for quit) after every ~23 lines.

Thanks to Quixadhal for the idea for this command!

See also : BRIEF, COMPACT, ECHO
#
VALUE

  In a shop, this command will tell you what the shopkeeper is willing
to pay for the item.

See Also : LIST, BUY, SELL, SHOPS
#
LIST

  In a shop this command will list what the shopkeeper has for sale,
with prices.

See Also : , BUY, SELL, SHOPS
#
RESTAURANTS FOOD

 Food comes in different shapes and sizes, you may find that meat is
left from a recent kill.  Food can spoil on Wiley, so be careful of what
you find and think you should eat.  Most stores provide food that will
not spoil, so if you buy it you are assured that it is good.

#
PSET
Immort-Only

Allows a Wiz to set values pertaining to the type of object being worked on.

Usage: pset <att> name <val>

att list: align class exp lev sex race hit mhit tohit bank gold prac
name: is the person|object|mobile you are working on.
value: an integer corresponding to the value you wish to set.

align		1000.....-1000
class		DO not use this one, let them suffer with what they chose
exp		any integer value, perferably higher then the value they have
lev		use advance instead! This screws multiclass
sex		If they really want it?
hit		integer: Hit points
mhit		Max hit points, you should not set this, unfair.
tohit		changes the thaco
bank		if they need reimburse for money, use this instead of giving.
gold		take it away if need be.
prac		Do not let them advance unnatuarly
#
WHOZONE

  This command lists all the players in the current zone and also
tells you their location. 

Players
-------
Cyric 					- Travelers Road
Muth                                    - Travelers Road

#
GTELL

Usage: gtell <what you want to tell them>

  This command alows you to talk with players grouped with you and only
those people.

See Also : GROUP, GREP
#
GREP

Usage: grep

  This command allows you to send your stats (mana, move and hits) to people
  in the same group as you.  Saves time in having to type them all in a say
  or gtell.

  Thanks to Bennu for the suggestion.

See Also: GTELL, GROUP

#
TRACK

  Track is a skill for rangers, it will allow you to track some prey from a 
distance.  Mana costs will vary according to race and class.  Although this
skill is for all to take, only those that are taugt from true masters will
advance quickly in this art.

> track wolf

You see a slight trail to the west...

#
SLANG TERMS ABBREVIATIONS BTW BRB IMO IMHO REIMBS

Many words and phrases have been shortened or abbreviated in net and MUD
communication, and it's not always easy to decipher these, so here's a
listing to help you get started -

BRB   : Be Right Back
BTW   : By The Way
Ppl   : People
IMO,
IMHO  : In My Opinion / In My Humble Opinion
Reimb : Reimbursal for equipment loss due to glitches in the game.  If you
	feel you need a reimb, post a note on the board and a God will get
	in touch with you about it :)
#
FUNC_ACT

Nasty function that does formatted output for player situations.

    $n - ch                      $N - victim
    $m - him/her/it of ch        $M him/her/it of victim
    $s - his/her/it of ch        $S his/her/it of victim
    $e - he/she/it of ch         $E he/she/it of victim
    $o - objective
    $p - possessive
    $a - a/an obj                $A a/an victim
    $T - victim 
    $F - fname(victim)

#~
